# GWAS_Premature_Stop_Codons
Genome-Wide Association Studies (GWAS) are a method of associating genetic variations with phenotypes that have gained popularity in the last two decades. The GWAS began with human research in order to identify risk genes that could cause diseases. Later it was also used as a method of obtaining more economically efficient and yielding plant species due to the increasing population. Another application of GWAS is to comprehend the evolutionary significance of natural variations in species. Arabidopsis thaliana plays an important role in evolution, and the effect of genetic variations on evolutionary genomics has been attempted to be understood using mutations identified through GWAS in this study.
There are various mutations that occur in all living things. Among these mutations, premature stop codon (non-sense) is a dangerous mutation and causes protein truncation. The study done before showed that over co-occurrence gene pairs were formed as a result of the premature stop codon in the same accession of A. thaliana. It was thought that there is a regulatory genes effect on the formation of the premature stop codons in the same accessions. These regulatory genes called as trans genes during this thesis. 1128 A. thaliana significant over co-occurrence gene pairs from 1135 accessions were used in this study, and 32 significant regulatory genes (trans genes) that played a role in the formation of these associations were identified. Common trans genes in the inversion versions of these over co-occurrence gene pairs were used for confirmation purposes while selecting the significant trans genes. The over co-occurrence gene pairs cause the formation of 32 trans genes and these trans genes are shown in the same gene network, allowing the interactions of trans genes on over co-occurrence gene pairs to be explored in greater depth. Although the threshold used for the non-normally distributed phenotype in the GWAS results was appropriate, both the Manhattan plot and the Quantile-Quantile plot detected more false positives than expected. It was attempted to determine causal variants from the GWAS results and the importance of the respective genes in the formation of the premature stop codon. However, detection of causal variants and the identification of SNPs that can cause premature stop codon formation proved to be very difficult. The factors that will cause this situation are still being researched and alternative methods are being sought to eliminate the causes.
In conclusion, the effect of regulatory genes (trans genes) on the formation of premature stop codons in the same accessions aims to demonstrate evolutionary significance with future confirmation tests.
## Gene Networks 
The gene networks are used during to create a final gene network are shown separately.
## Results and Figures
The results of the this study are found in the PermGWAS.ipynb and GWAS_Python_R_code.ipynb.
## Scripts 
The scripts are used during study and addtional computtainal scripts are shown. 

